                                        Morescient GAI for Software Engineering (Extended Version)
                                        MARCUS KESSEL and COLIN ATKINSON, University of Mannheim, Germany
                                        The ability of Generative AI (GAI) technology to automatically check, synthesize and modify software
                                        engineering artifacts promises to revolutionize all aspects of software engineering. Using GAI for software




arXiv:2406.04710v2 [cs.SE] 3 Dec 2024
                                        engineering tasks is consequently one of the most rapidly expanding fields of software engineering research,
                                        with over a hundred LLM-based code models having been published since 2021. However, the overwhelming
                                        majority of existing code models share a major weakness – they are exclusively trained on the syntactic facet
                                        of software, significantly lowering their trustworthiness in tasks dependent on software semantics. To address
                                        this problem, a new class of “Morescient” GAI is needed that is “aware” of (i.e., trained on) both the semantic
                                        and static facets of software. This, in turn, will require a new generation of software observation platforms
                                        capable of generating large quantities of execution observations in a structured and readily analyzable way.
                                        In this paper, we present a vision and roadmap for how such “Morescient” GAI models can be engineered,
                                        evolved and disseminated according to the principles of open science.
                                        CCS Concepts: • Software and its engineering → Software notations and tools; • Computing method-
                                        ologies → Artificial intelligence; Natural language processing.
                                        Additional Key Words and Phrases: generative AI, morescience, semantics, dynamic, analysis, behavior-aware,
                                        observation, dataset, vision, roadmap
                                        ACM Reference Format:
                                        Marcus Kessel and Colin Atkinson. 2024. Morescient GAI for Software Engineering (Extended Version). ACM
                                        Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol. 1, 1, Article 1 (November 2024), 17 pages. https://doi.org/XXXXXXX.XXXXXXX

                                        1    INTRODUCTION
                                        Generative-AI-based tools, and particularly Large Language Models (LLMs) of the kind made
                                        famous by OpenAI’s ChatGPT, are set to become one of the most disruptive technologies in
                                        software engineering for decades. They are not only able to synthesize software artifacts (including
                                        source code) from simple, natural language prompts [22], they can automatically perform many
                                        other software engineering tasks such as repairing, refactoring and explaining code, generating
                                        test cases and comprehending programs. Training and using LLMs for software engineering tasks,
                                        which Hou et al. [27] call LLM4SE and Lo calls AI4SE [43], has therefore rapidly become one of
                                        the largest research fields in software engineering with well over 100 different models for code
                                        synthesis having already been published and/or described in the literature [39, 42].
                                           Despite their huge potential, however, most LLM4SE applications share one major Achilles’ heel
                                        that significantly reduces their potential to improve productivity in mainstream software engineer-
                                        ing projects – they are exclusively trained on the syntactic facet of software. Static properties of
                                        code are not only the most tangible manifestation of software, they are the most amenable to the
                                        traditional, static analysis approaches of computer science and the statistical NLP techniques of
                                        data science (cf. the naturalness of code principle [2]). However, code has another equally important
                                        Authors’ address: Marcus Kessel, marcus.kessel@uni-mannheim.de; Colin Atkinson, colin.atkinson@uni-mannheim.de,
                                        University of Mannheim, Mannheim, Germany.

                                        Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee
                                        provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the
                                        full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must be honored.
                                        Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires
                                        prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
                                        © 2024 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
                                        ACM 1049-331X/2024/11-ART1
                                        https://doi.org/XXXXXXX.XXXXXXX


                                                                     ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: November 2024.
1:2                                                                                  Marcus Kessel and Colin Atkinson


facet, its run-time behavior (a.k.a. as its dynamic semantics), which is much less tangible and cannot,
in general, be deduced analytically from the syntactic facet (cf. Rice’s theorem [53]). As a result,
the “true” or “de facto” dynamic semantics of a non-trivial piece of code can only be determined by
observing its behavior in response to known stimuli under known conditions (i.e., through software
testing) [3, 5].
    Since the vast majority of code LLMs created to date are exclusively trained on the syntactic
facet of software, they have no direct knowledge of the semantic facet, and are thus “unaware” of
the actual behavior of software. Thus, when an LLM exclusively trained on syntactic data is asked
to create a procedure to “sort” an array of elements, for example, it can only use the linguistic
(i.e., identifier-based) information it has collected syntactically about procedures related to “sort”
rather than procedures that demonstrably deliver “sort” behavior at run-time, because it has never
been exposed to data that captures the “de facto” behavior of such procedures. In addition to their
ignorance of true functional properties, LLMs are also unaware of another critical aspect of software:
non-functional properties such as performance (e.g., speed and resource utilization) which can
only be obtained at run-time in a target execution environment. Functional and non-functional
properties are crucial aspects of software development that play a significant role in ensuring
the quality, reliability, and overall success of software systems [6]. Neglecting any of them can
have significant consequences such as higher risks and operational costs (e.g., blindly choosing
a generated code artifact that turns out to have poor resource usage behavior in a cloud-based
environment).
    This ignorance of de facto behavior directly contributes to the low trustworthiness of the current
generation of code LLMs. For example, in a recent experiment (a replication) [10] we showed
that code synthesis solutions for Java coding problems returned by OpenAI’s Davinci model are,
on average, correct only 42% of the time [32], and the solutions returned by two other popular
models, Codegen and InCoder, are correct only 22% and 9% of the time, respectively. On the other
hand, although more recent studies have shown substantial gains on widely used, Python-based
benchmarks like HumanEval and MBPP and their improved derivatives1 like EvalPlus [39], these
advances come with a major caveat: the benchmarks are becoming increasingly saturated. In fact,
some models are already converging to optimal precision, reducing their utility for evaluating
model performance for practitioners.
    These problems have contributed to growing skepticism about the representativeness of popular
benchmarks, and the potential for data leakage [45] (i.e., models being trained on solutions to the
code challenges used to evaluate them). As a result, there is an increasing concern that current
benchmarks may not accurately reflect likely performance in real-world coding tasks, but merely
indicate their performance on artificially-simple coding problems. Researchers and practitioners
alike are therefore increasingly skeptical about the reliability of AI-generated code, with major tech
companies like Microsoft, Google and Meta reporting that their developers typically reject around
two-thirds of AI-powered code recommendations (e.g., GitHub Copilot [23]). This widespread
untrustworthiness of GAI raises concerns that potential productivity gains from automated code
synthesis may be offset by the need for additional verification and validation effort to ensure the
quality of the resulting software system [3].
    To address the lack of awareness of de facto run-time behavior, we believe a completely new
class of code LLMs is required that “knows about” the true dynamic semantics of code, alongside
the usual syntactic properties, because they have been trained on both facets of software rather just
the latter. We characterize such LLMs as “morescient” – a neologism derived from the Latin words
“mores” (behavior) and “scire” (to know). Our underlying hypothesis is that morescient LLMs will

1 Even the benchmarks were criticized for missing true behavior awareness, since they contained weak tests



ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: November 2024.
Morescient GAI for Software Engineering (Extended Version)                                                         1:3


deliver much more trustworthy results [34, 43] than traditional trained LLMs, and therefore will be
much more useful in practical software engineering projects[21].
   The outline of the paper is as follows. First, in Section 2, we discuss the current state of the art in
morescient GAI and the main obstacles to achieving it. Next, in Section 3, we present the types of
data structures and platforms necessary for realizing morescient GAI. This is followed by Section 4,
where we outline our vision for an open, continual approach to maintaining an evolving dataset of
observations of the same order of magnitude as current syntactic code datasets. Finally, in Section
5, we provide a roadmap for integrating true-behavior awareness into generative AI for software
engineering. We conclude this work with some closing remarks in Section 6.

2     STATE OF THE ART
At the time of writing, the overwhelming majority of GAI code models have been trained on
statically derived data and raw code. There has been a small number of attempts to include de facto
(i.e., observed) run-time behavior in the training or use of code LLMs, but since they are highly
limited in their scope and scale, we refer to them as semi-morescient. In the following subsection
we describe these preliminary attempts at morescience, before summarizing the main obstacles
that stand in the way of achieving this in a comprehensive and systematic way in the subsequent
subsection.

2.1    Semi-Morescient Approaches
To date, researchers have explored three main lines of research to improve the morescience of GAI-
derived code. The first line, which we refer to as “morescient training”, aims to include observations
of code modules’ run-time behavior in the collection of data used to train and fine-tune code LLMs.
The second line, which we refer to as “morescient usage”, aims to improve the results gained from
code LLM queries by selecting and refining results using feedback from the compilation and/or
execution of returned candidates. The third line of research, which we refer to as “morescient
benchmarking”, uses execution-based feedback to improve the benchmarking of code LLMs. Each
of these is elaborated further below.
Morescient Training. This line of research leverages execution information in the initial training
and fine-tuning of execution-aware code models. Notable examples include CodeExecutor [38]
and TRACED [17]. The latter, in particular, incorporates run-time trace information into its training
data to enhance understanding of program behavior across multiple downstream tasks: semantic
clone retrieval, vulnerability detection, and static execution estimation (e.g., predicting which paths
or code elements will be covered).
   More recent research has also attempted to train models to comprehend and reason about
operational semantics in a step-by-step execution style, including scratchpad [51], NeXt [49], and
SemCoder [16]. While scratchpad and NeXt employ trace reasoning formats of different kinds,
SemCoder utilizes a monologue reasoning technique, where each execution step is verbalized to
provide a human-readable representation of the code’s execution. At the model construction stage,
learning-based techniques can be employed to improve the quality of the code LLMs generate for
certain software engineering tasks. By incorporating behavioral feedback obtained from compilers
and/or tests [40, 55] within reinforcement learning frameworks, it is possible to identify functionally
incorrect generated code and take corrective action.
   GAI-based oracle recommendation approaches like TOGA [15] or program repair approaches
[61] are specifically trained using test code (e.g., harvested or generated unit test methods). TOGA,
for instance, predicts oracle values by generating assertion statements for a provided test. Since test
code embodies abstract semantics (i.e., high-level understanding of code module properties), such

                          ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: November 2024.
1:4                                                                                  Marcus Kessel and Colin Atkinson


as inputs and outputs, they have elements of morescience. However, they can only be classified as
semi-morescient because their ability to generate oracle values is critically dependent on accurate
predictions of the code that is supposed to deliver the described behavior, including the prediction
of the actual “focal method” – that is, the portion of the code that is being tested by a test.

Morescient Usage. This line of work uses execution information gathered through testing to select
the best solution from multiple code generations. This can be accomplished by sampling from a
set of potential solutions, such as those provided by CodeT [11] or LEVER [50] and selecting the
one that reveals interesting discrepancies [31]. Some authors (e.g., [12]) apply this idea using the
run-time feedback to iteratively improve the generated solution through so called “self-debugging”.
   The authors of [35] further showcase the effectiveness of execution-based reasoning as a prompt-
ing technique by introducing the Chain of Code (CoC) approach, a novel prompting technique
that generates code to reason through problems. By executing this generated code using either a
code interpreter or a language model simulating the execution, CoC can tackle intricate coding
problems.

Morescient Benchmarking. Existing benchmarks that reason about the properties of LLM generated
code have recently also become more aware of code behavior. While existing popular benchmarks
like HumanEval and MBPP [39], or CodeContests [37], include tests that describe the desired
behavior in terms of abstract semantics (i.e., test inputs and expected outputs), they are only used
to evaluate the performance of models and their code generation capabilities with respect to the
property of functional correctness. However, they do not assess the other fundamental dimension
of code models – their ability to reason about the de facto behavior of code. CRUXEval [24] is an
“execution benchmark” for code reasoning, understanding, and execution evaluation that attempts
to address this problem by using 800 Python functions with corresponding input-output pairs to
assess their input value prediction and output value prediction capabilities.

2.2   Obstacles to Morescient GAI
Although the aforementioned approaches have delivered useful insights how GAI technology can
be made more aware of run-time behavior, they are all limited by a number of fundamental obstacles
to the systematic, comprehensive and open development of morescient GAI, as summarized in the
following sections.

Lack of Suitable Data Structures. Current approaches are typically ad hoc solutions employing
improvised data structures (and representations) as well as manually curated data sets, or data sets
synthesized with the assistance of LLMs (e.g., [16, 24]). Although things have improved slightly,
the availability of dynamic (observational) data remains significantly limited compared to syntactic
data, hindering the development of fully morescient models. This is because real-world, high-quality
corpora of run-time behavior (i.e., morescient data sets) are challenging to obtain and curate at
a large scale [9, 52]. A prerequisite is parsable and executable code. However, even if code meets
these criteria, observing its executable behavior poses a significant challenge due to the lack of
documentation needed for testing (i.e., lack of tests).
   To achieve the desired scaling effects of LLMs for run-time behavior [29], it is essential to develop
more advanced LLM models supported by efficient data structures. These structures must be capable
of storing or linking vast quantities of observation data – both functional and non-functional –
and associating it with existing syntactic code models. Additionally, they must be designed with
interoperability in mind, enabling seamless integration for the training and continuous improvement
of LLMs.

ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: November 2024.
Morescient GAI for Software Engineering (Extended Version)                                                         1:5


   The diversity of code semantics – including behavioral and static – can be captured by relation-
ships over distinct dimensions. To effectively manage these relationships, they must be cleanly and
explicitly stored. Consequently, the required data structures should support a unified framework
that enables navigation over, and tracking of, these relationships (e.g., linking code modules to
tests that executed them and to the observed behavior).

Fragmented and Poor Quality of Training Data. The performance of LLMs is only as good as the
quality of its training data, which depends on several factors, particularly when it comes to natural
language text and code. It has been shown that LLMs replicate vulnerabilities, bugs, and poor code
quality present in their training data [4, 22, 41]. For example, while the Codex LLM powering GitHub
Copilot can help prevent some types of “simple, stupid” bugs, it also generates code containing
these bugs at twice the rate of correct code [28].
    One essential factor affecting quality is deduplication of data and code, which is considered
critical for the quality of training data sets [1, 33]. Unfortunately, since there is no commonly
accepted data structure to represent run-time behavior and its various representations in terms of
dynamic semantics, there is a lack of understanding about what constitutes high-quality dynamic
training data, beyond general guidelines learned from general-purpose, syntactic training data.
    The current generation of code models suffers from poor data quality, primarily due to a critical
oversight: unverified training code. Many data sets lack executable code, as checks for compilability
(i.e., syntax and static semantics) and executability are often skipped because of the high costs and
complexity involved (e.g., missing build information). Desirable properties like self-contained code
modules (i.e., standalone modules that can run without external dependencies) are also difficult to
identify automatically. As a result, there have been ad hoc attempts to manually curate or synthesize
training data to bypass the challenges of collecting dynamic data, which has led to a fragmented
data landscape. For example, Ding et al. found that roughly a quarter of the Python solutions in
OSS-Instruct [60], which were synthetically created from code LLMs, were not executable [16].
    If this fundamental issue could be addressed, generated code would likely exhibit similar charac-
teristics (i.e., executability), making large-scale data structures and platforms more feasible.

Lack of Structured Representations of Semantics. The availability of specialized data structures
for storing and linking semantic information represents just one aspect of the broader challenge
of reasoning about functional and non-functional properties of software. Equally crucial is the
consideration of how observed semantics are actually represented within these structures, effectively
capturing their nuances and complexities. The development of fully morescient GAI approaches
is hindered by the lack of formal representations of run-time behavior, especially in how the
true behavior of software is linked to the syntax in the data used to train LLMs. For operational
semantics that describe actions in terms of step-by-step computations (e.g., debugging), effectively
representing execution traces has been a persistent challenge in dynamic analysis. In the case of
LLMs, even representing abstract semantics presents difficulties, such as selecting an appropriate
encoding scheme to serialize input and output objects for abstract semantics (e.g., a suitable string
representation for Java objects). Ideally, these semantic representations should be language-agnostic,
enabling more efficient knowledge transfer across multiple programming languages. However,
current approaches (e.g., [16, 17]) are limited, as they are typically designed for specific programming
languages, restricting their applicability.
   The choice of behavior representation has a substantial impact on how the model processes and
generates results, including the textual output. Understanding how run-time behavior is represented
in LLMs is essential for designing effective architectures, accurately evaluating performance metrics,
and creating applications tailored to specific user needs based on perspectives on run-time behavior.

                          ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: November 2024.
1:6                                                                                  Marcus Kessel and Colin Atkinson


  Developing a clear definition of software semantics is a challenging task on its own. However, the
complexity increases significantly when considering the wide range of software engineering tasks
that must be addressed. To make progress in developing fully morescient GAI approaches, what is
needed is a clear representation of the various dynamic semantics, as well as an understanding of
how they are represented across training data sets used to train morescient code models and how
they are aligned with the syntactic code model.
Lack of Scalable Testing Approaches. In the preceding subsection on data quality, we touched upon
general issues related to ensuring compilability and executability of code. Since true behavior of
code modules can only be observed through run-time observations (i.e., software testing), suitable
sets of tests are required that exercise the behavior of code in a way that accurately captures its
behavior.
   Current benchmarking approaches rely on a combination of traditional test generation techniques
and LLM-based methods, such as synthesis of test inputs or sequences, exemplified by EvalPlus
[39]. These methods focus primarily on improving coverage metrics (e.g., mutation score) through
defect detection. However, they have two significant limitations: (1) they lack a systematic and
structured approach to test case design, instead relying on the assumption that defect testing can
effectively capture run-time behavior; and (2) their scalability is compromised by the use of classic
test representation techniques, such as unit test representations and drivers, which are designed
for single-code-module testing and fail to scale to ultra-large execution scenarios. Moreover, these
test drivers usually do not have the capability to capture the other interesting run-time behavior –
that is the measurement of non-functional properties including performance and execution time.
   To address these limitations, there is a need for novel test case representation languages that
can effectively discern subtle nuances in run-time behavior. Additionally, scalable test drivers are
required to efficiently execute large corpora of executable code through mass-execution, allowing
for the collection of comprehensive run-time data.
Fragmentation and Superfluity of Benchmarks. The community has acknowledged the limitations of
traditional NLP-based benchmarks, such as the BLEU score [19], which evaluates generated code by
comparing it to canonical ground truth solutions based on textual similarity. Popular benchmarks
like HumanEval and MBPP, therefore, use unit-test-driven evaluation with the pass@k metric
[22] (i.e., the probability that at least one of the top k generated code samples for a given problem
passes all the unit tests).
   Benchmark approaches are often applied manually (i.e., through the manual curation of coding
problems in terms of desired behavior and tests) and thus are time-consuming and error-prone [39],
and/or are used together with arguably “risky” LLM-based code synthesis technology (i.e., because
models trained on synthetic data generated by GAI may eventually collapse [56]). The proliferation
of these factors has resulted in the fragmentation, superfluity and excessive diversity of benchmarks.
Some authors have consequently been driven to propose novel, typically small-scale benchmarks
that cater to idiosyncratic preferences, often as a means to sidestep the inherent challenges in
evaluating their own approaches. One of the biggest challenges is curating benchmarks at large
scale that contain coding problems and descriptions of desired behavior at appropriate abstraction
levels, including black-box (e.g., tests) and white-box behavior (e.g., traces). To overcome these
challenges, there is a need for large-scale benchmarking approaches that can automatically create
new coding problems (i.e., functionality) and corresponding descriptions of run-time behavior.
Lack of Suitable Platforms. A crucial requirement for developing fully morescient LLMs is the
availability of robust platforms that can collect, store, and manage vast quantities of high-quality
observation data, encompassing both functional and non-functional aspects. These platforms must

ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: November 2024.
Morescient GAI for Software Engineering (Extended Version)                                                         1:7


be specifically designed to handle ultra-large data sets and provide suitable data structures for
training and improving LLMs. To achieve parity between behavior data sets and code data sets,
these platforms must effectively address the limitations and challenges outlined earlier, ensuring the
resulting data sets are comprehensive, accurate, and large enough for reliable model development.

Challenges in Obtaining Observation Data at Large Scale. Achieving scalable testing poses two
key challenges. First, as mentioned above, there is a need for optimized test drivers that can
execute potentially large numbers of tests on large numbers of code modules in parallel, without
compromising performance. Second, obtaining precise observation data at scale within a given time
budget is essential, but comes with its own set of complexities. A significant obstacle to efficient
testing is the need for advanced analysis and tracing techniques. Extensive tracing through analysis
tools and measurement calipers can provide valuable insights into code behavior, but introduces
a substantial overhead in execution time. This can lead to significantly slower code execution
due to the added complexity of instrumentation or introspection techniques. To overcome these
challenges, improved techniques that balance scalability with precision are needed.
   In general, there is a trade-off between the amount of data traced (i.e., the level of precision of
the data), and the overhead caused at execution [13]. The lower the precision of the traced data, the
lower the overhead. To mitigate this overhead, two key developments are essential: (a) the continued
advancement of dynamic analysis techniques to improve their efficiency, such as through hybrid
approaches combining static and dynamic analysis [20], and (b) a deeper understanding of the
aforementioned trade-offs to support more informed design decisions when capturing morescient
data at appropriate precision levels for the software engineering tasks at hand.

3   CAPTURING BEHAVIORAL SEMANTICS
Computer scientists have developed a range of different techniques for describing the semantics of
software (i.e., programming languages) at different levels of abstraction, including denotational
techniques, where run-time meaning is defined by mappings to well-known mathematical domains,
axiomatic or algebraic techniques, where run-time meaning is defined by the cumulative behavior
of component actions, and natural language (sometimes called approximate) techniques, where
run-time meaning is defined in textual prose (e.g., code documentation) [25, 26]. In practice, the
three most important levels of abstraction are —

    • abstract semantics: which describe the black-box behavior of functional abstractions (e.g.,
      classes or methods) in terms of their externally visibly behavior (i.e., properties),
    • operational semantics: which describe the white-box behavior of the implementation of a
      functional abstraction in terms of the individual, step-wise operations that realize its overall
      behavior (e.g., the method or class body),
    • concrete semantics: which describe the detailed execution semantics of a compiled method or
      class body at the level of the machine code or intermediate code of the execution platform.

   To achieve full morescience, GAI code models will ultimately need to be trained on descriptions
at all levels and in all the different forms in which they are available. Languages used to capture
observation-based descriptions of abstract semantics are currently the most inadequate, as they
tend to focus on unit testing rather than data analysis or GAI training. The primary obstacle in
addressing these challenges is the lack of suitable data structures that can systematically and
scalably capture the abstract semantics of functional abstractions in terms of their actual responses
to valid stimuli.

                          ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: November 2024.
1:8                                                                                                                                                   Marcus Kessel and Colin Atkinson


                                Implementations
                                (i.e., code module versions/variants)
               SRM
                                                                                                                                             Output      Operation        Inputs
                          𝑆         𝑆𝐼1    𝑆𝐼2       𝑆𝐼3      …

                          𝑇𝐼1       …      …         …        …
                                                                                                                                             A            B          C             D
                          𝑇𝐼2
            Tests                                                                                                                      1                  create     𝑄𝑖
                          𝑇3
                                                                                                                                       2     TRUE         enqueue    A1            1
                          …
                                                                                                                                       3     TRUE         enqueue    A1            2
                                                                                                                                       4     1            peek       A1
           Functional observations                            Non-functional observations
           A     B              C         D      E                Time      Memory           Branches             …                    5     2            size       A1
                                                                  taken     used             Covered
      1          create         𝑆𝐼2                                                                                                    6     1            dequeue    A1
                                                                  …         …                …                    …
      2    3     sum            A1        1      2                                                                                     7     1            size       A1

               (a) Sequence Sheets and Stimulus-Response Matrix (SRM)                                                             (b) Sequence Sheet for a (stateful) Queue Abstraction


                                                           Repetitions     Functional Abstractions

                                                                          Implementations
                                                                                                         𝑆𝑆𝑆 𝑆𝑆𝐼1𝐼1 𝑆𝑆𝐼2𝐼2 𝑆𝑆𝐼3𝐼3      ……
                                                                                                                                        …
                                                                                                               𝑛

                                                                                            𝑆𝑆𝑆       𝑆𝑆𝐼𝑇𝑇𝐼𝑇1𝐼1 𝑆𝑆𝐼…
                                                                                                             𝐼1     …… 𝑆𝑆𝐼……… ……………    ………
                                                               Tests                           …
                                                                                                        1
                                                                                                        𝐼1        2
                                                                                                                  𝐼2       3
                                                                                                                           𝐼3     …
                                                                                         𝑇               𝑇𝑇𝐼
                                                                                𝑆𝑆𝑆 𝑆𝑆𝐼1𝐼1𝑇𝐼𝑇1𝐼1𝐼1𝑆𝑆𝐼2𝐼…
                                                                                                       2
                                                                                                        ……𝑇2𝐼𝑆2𝐼𝑆2𝐼3𝐼……… ……………
                                                                                                                           …
                                                                                                                                 ………
                                                                                     1
                                                                                         𝑇𝑇𝐼2            𝑇𝑇3 3
                                                                                𝑇𝑇𝐼1                        𝑇33
                                                                                   𝐼1  ……… 𝑇𝐼2𝐼2……… ……            …      ………
                                                                                          𝑇𝑇3            ……
                                                                                𝑇𝑇𝐼2         𝑇33           …
                                                                                   𝐼2
                                                                                         ……
                                                                                𝑇𝑇3         …
                                                                                   3

                                                                                ……
                                                                                 …


                                                                                (b) Stimulus-Response Hypercube (SRH)



                                          Fig. 1. Proposed Data Structures for Behavior Representation



3.1       Data Structures
To address this obstacle we propose three new data structures – sequence sheets, which capture
sequences of stimulus-response interactions (cf. tests in terms of triples of inputs, operation
invocation and corresponding outputs [5]) in a tabular form, stimulus-response matrices (SRMs),
which capture collections of sequence sheets representing multiple tests of multiple implementations
of a given functional abstraction (i.e., functionality or coding problem), and stimulus-response
hypercubes (SRHs) which capture collections of SRMs representing multiple repetitions of multiple
tests of multiple functional abstractions.
   Figure 1 (a) provides a schematic representation of the first two of these. The bottom left-hand
side shows a sequence sheet that captures the response of an implementation of a code module 𝑆,
𝑆𝐼2 , to a test 𝑆𝑇3 , which entails one invocation of the functionality provided by 𝑆 (a single “sum”
operation for adding two integers). This corresponds to the single (grey) cell of the SRM, which
stores multiple tests of multiple implementations of 𝑆. As well as the functional information stored
in a sequence sheet, each cell also provides access to relevant non-functional information about
the test, such as execution time, memory usage and trace information (here branches covered).
   Figure (b) presents a more complex sequence sheet for a (stateful) queue abstraction. Unlike the
“sum” abstraction, which comprises a single statement, the queue test sequence showcases a series of
statements to test core queue behavior – specifically, the first-in-first-out (FIFO) behavior. Notably,
all intermediate observational states are captured (i.e., execution flow), providing a comprehensive

ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: November 2024.
Morescient GAI for Software Engineering (Extended Version)                                                           1:9


view of an implementation’s execution over time. SRMs can universally store or link observational
records of arbitrary semantic types, encompassing both abstract and operational semantics.
    Complex inputs and outputs, such as stateful objects, can be stored in sequence sheets using
multiple approaches. The choice depends on the structure of the object. For objects where properties
(i.e., class attributes) can be represented by a simple key-value hierarchy, their entire state can
be serialized into a suitable representation such as a JSON document, where all properties are
accessible by key. Alternatively, when only specific data is needed, inspector methods can be
identified that access relevant properties (i.e., state data) of interest. For binary data inputs such
as input streams, several strategies exist: either the storage location of the physical copy can be
directly linked into the sequence sheet, or suitable metadata like hash signatures can be employed to
identify and reference equivalent or similar data. This latter approach reduces storage redundancy
while enabling efficient comparison and retrieval of identical or near-identical data.
    Finally, Figure (c) gives a schematic representation of an SRH, the third data structure, which col-
lects multiple SRMs applied to multiple code module implementations multiple times in potentially
different conditions (e.g., execution environments). SRHs, therefore, provide a multidimensional
way of navigating over and analyzing observations from many executions of many implementations
under many controlled conditions, including different target execution environments in which
observations are obtainable. Since they are representable in the ubiquitous data frame structures
supported by popular data processing languages like Python and R, they also lend themselves to
analysis by mainstream data analytics tools (i.e., are highly accessible and offer interoperability).

3.2    Platform and Test Driver
The key to obtaining more sophisticated data sets containing (1) executable code and (2) run-
time data, at scale, lies in automation. The roadmap envisions a platform that not only realizes
the data structures outlined above, but also offers flexible, domain-specific languages to design
automatic, data-driven workflows on morescient data sets (e.g., SRHs) based on individual selection
criteria tailored to the software engineering task at hand. Our prototype implementation of such
a platform, the Large-Scale Software Observatorium (LASSO)2 [32], features a domain-specific
scripting language to design analysis pipelines for generating high-quality data sets based on
individual preferences and functional/non-functional properties of interest [30]. It achieves this
by integrating a test driver and additional measurement tools to facilitate the mass-execution of
code modules and record their run-time functional and non-functional behavior in SRMs. LASSO
employs a dedicated “arena” test driver that efficiently executes large sets of tests and code module
implementations (i.e., specified in stimulus matrices) harvested from repositories or synthesized
from LLMs, in a distributed manner (using vertical and horizontal parallelization).

4     CONTINUALLY EVOLVING, OPEN STIMULUS-RESPONSE HYPERCUBES
To achieve data quantities for morescient run-time data comparable to those of syntactic code
datasets and realize the desired scaling effects of LLMs, we propose developing an ever-growing
morescient dataset grounded in the SRH concept introduced earlier. We refer to this concept as an
open, continual SRH, which we will describe in the remainder of this section.

4.1 Dimensional Extensibility
There are many potential approaches to developing a continually evolving SRH. However, to ensure
its trustworthiness from the outset, we believe it must be designed to be open and accessible. This
aligns with the principles of open science and aims to “democratize” access to the data, similar
2 project is freely available on GitHub: https://softwareobservatorium.github.io/



                            ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: November 2024.
1:10                                                                                                                                                                   Marcus Kessel and Colin Atkinson



                                                                                            Continually, Evolving SRH



                                                                                              Models (Morescient LLMs)

          Repetitions    Functional Abstractions

                        Implementations                                                                              𝑆𝑆𝑆 𝑆𝑆𝐼1𝐼1         𝑆𝑆𝐼2     𝑆𝑆𝐼3    ……
                                                    𝑆𝑆𝑆 𝑆𝑆𝐼1𝐼1       𝑆𝑆𝐼2
                                                                        𝐼2
                                                                              𝑆𝑆𝐼3
                                                                                 𝐼3
                                                                                      ……
                                                                                       …                                𝑛
                                                                                                                                           𝐼2       𝐼3    …                             𝑆𝑆𝑆 𝑆𝑆𝐼1𝐼1      𝑆𝑆𝐼2
                                                                                                                                                                                                           𝐼2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 𝑆𝑆𝐼3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    𝐼3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ……
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          …
                                                       𝑛                                                                                                                                   𝑛
                                                                                                                     𝑇
                                                      𝑇
                                      𝑆𝑆𝑆 𝑆𝑆𝐼1𝐼1𝑇𝐼𝑇1𝐼1𝐼1 𝑆𝑆𝐼2𝐼…2…… 𝑆𝑆𝐼3𝐼…3…… ………………   ………                𝑆𝑆𝑆 𝑆𝑆𝐼1𝐼1𝑇𝐼𝑇1𝐼1𝐼1 𝑆𝑆𝐼2𝐼…2…… 𝑆𝑆𝐼3𝐼…3…… ………………   ………                         𝑇
                                                                                                                                                                         𝑆𝑆𝑆 𝑆𝑆𝐼1𝐼1𝑇𝐼𝑇1𝐼1𝐼1 𝑆𝑆𝐼2𝐼…2…… 𝑆𝑆𝐼3𝐼…3…… ………………   ………
              Tests                          …                                                                 …                                                               …
                                                      𝑇𝑇𝐼                                                𝑇           𝑇𝑇𝐼                                                             𝑇𝑇𝐼
                                      𝑇                                                                𝑆𝐼 𝑇𝐼𝑇1𝐼1 𝑆𝐼 …
                                                                                                                    ……𝑇2𝐼𝑆2𝐼𝐼2 ……… … ……… ………                             𝑇
                             𝑆𝑆𝑆 𝑆𝑆𝐼1𝐼1𝑇𝐼𝑇1𝐼1𝐼1𝑆𝑆𝐼2𝐼………𝑇2𝐼𝑆2𝐼𝑆𝐼23𝐼……… …………… ………                𝑆𝑆𝑆      𝑆1𝐼1 𝐼1 𝑆2𝐼2     𝑆3𝐼      ……                           𝑆𝑆𝑆     𝑆𝐼 𝑇𝐼𝑇1𝐼1 𝑆𝐼 …
                                                                                                                                                                        𝑆1𝐼1        ……𝑇2𝐼𝑆2𝐼𝐼2 ……… … ……… ………
                                                                                                                                                                               𝐼1 𝑆2𝐼       𝑆3𝐼   ……
                                  1                 2
                                                      𝑇𝑇3 3
                                                                        …                         1
                                                                                                           𝑇         𝑇𝑇3 3                                        1                 2
                                                                                                                                                                                        𝑇𝑇3 3
                                                                                                                       𝑇33
                             𝑇𝑇𝐼1
                                      𝑇𝑇𝐼2
                                    ……… 𝑇2𝐼2……… ……
                                           𝐼
                                                         𝑇33
                                                                      ………                      𝑇𝑇𝐼1
                                                                                                  𝐼1   ………𝑇𝐼𝑇2𝐼2𝐼2……… ……  …      ………                           𝑇𝑇𝐼1
                                                                                                                                                                           𝑇
                                                                                                                                                                       ………𝑇𝐼𝑇2𝐼2𝐼2……… ……
                                                                                                                                                                                       3  𝑇3
                                                                                                                                                                                                  ………
                                                      …… …                                                                                                                           … …
                                𝐼1                                                                                   …                                            𝐼1
                                                                                                           𝑇𝑇3        ……                                                                ……
                                       𝑇𝑇3              …                                      𝑇𝑇𝐼2          𝑇33                                                          𝑇𝑇3
                             𝑇𝑇𝐼2         𝑇33                                                     𝐼2                                                           𝑇𝑇𝐼2         𝑇33
                                𝐼2                                                                                                                                𝐼2
                                        ……                                                                ……                                                              ……
                              𝑇𝑇3        …                                                      𝑇𝑇3        …                                                   𝑇𝑇3         …
                                 3                                                                 3                                                              3

                             ……                                                                ……                                                              ……
                              …                                                                 …                                                               …




                                                                                                          Code                                     Executable Code
                                                                                                           Code



                            Fig. 2. An Open, Continually Evolving SRH of de facto Behavior Data



to current open-scientific collaborations such as the Big Project and its open code dataset, The
Stack [44]. Such an open, community-driven SRH of the kind visualized in Figure 2 would be
continuously expanded and enriched by many contributors over time, including researchers and
industry practitioners alike.
   At the beginning, such an SRH would be a sparse data structure. The subsequent expansion [32]
would not only continually refine the core dimensions of the SRH (cf. Section 3), incorporating
additional harvested/synthesized tests and implementations for each functional abstraction over
time, but would also grow to accommodate new dimensions. New data sources (i.e., code reposi-
tories), tools and GAI models could be used to harvest or synthesize these. Such a growing SRH
would also facilitate the future integration of diverse, behavior data sets by community members
using their own morescient GAI approaches in the models dimension. Over time, we anticipate
that the community will converge on a common, effective representation of run-time behavior for
morescient GAI, agreeing upon them across various levels of abstraction (abstract and operational
semantics). This shared understanding will serve as a foundation for further advancements around
the open, evolving SRH.
   Similar to today’s state-of-the-art code LLMs, an evolving SRH must support polyglot program-
ming. This capability will allow the community to leverage a wealth of knowledge from diverse
codebases written in various relevant programming languages. To accelerate the scaling effects
of morescient LLMs, the community must focus on developing common and effective representa-
tions of run-time behavior. To maintain a clear separation of concerns and ensure interoperability,
we assume that run-time data and syntactic data (i.e., executable code) will be kept in separate
datasets. Thus, SRHs will essentially maintain a link to code module implementations. Since tests
are represented as sequence sheets, they are also explicitly stored in SRHs.
   With a diverse community helping to evolving SRHs, it is reasonable to assume that the overall
quality of the data will improve. As more users engage with the system, they are likely to identify
discrepancies or inaccuracies in the data. This collective scrutiny can lead to the detection and

ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: November 2024.
Morescient GAI for Software Engineering (Extended Version)                                                        1:11


correction of errors, ultimately resulting in a more reliable and trustworthy morescient data set
(including executable code data sets).

4.2    Unified Benchmarking
The open, evolving SRH concept described above not only provides a continuously growing dataset
of training data, but also offers a vast repository of sample cases for unified benchmarking. Given
that benchmarks are specific to software engineering tasks, individual benchmarks can be derived
from the SRH, as long as standard practices in machine learning training like train-validation-test
splits are followed to prevent data leakage.
   As such an SRH continuously evolves, new revisions (versions) of the data can be created
to facilitate ongoing benchmarking with fresh data. This means that not only is the SRH itself
expanding and evolving, but the benchmarks used to assess emerging morescient GAI approaches
are evolving as well. Consequently, the results shown by current initiatives such as leaderboards
can be directly linked to the specific versions of morescient data that produced those results.

5     A ROADMAP FOR MORESCIENT GAI
Sanitized stimulus-response data, stored in the aforementioned data structures, can facilitate
morescient GAI in several ways. Below, we outline a roadmap for the next few years, highlighting
key milestones and research directions for leveraging observational data to drive progress toward
fully morescient GAI approaches.

5.1    Curating Data Sets
Initially, the key enabling factor for morescient GAI approaches will be the availability of large,
high-quality data sets. A foundational version of an open, evolving SRH described in the previous
section will therefore be created early on. More specifically, to obtain high-quality datasets for
morescient GAI, it is essential to first focus on developing high-quality, syntax-driven code models
that are executable and testable. This foundation is crucial, as morescient GAI relies on these
models to capture run-time observations of functional and non-functional properties in terms of
the SRHs discussed before. Therefore, the quality of the syntactic code models will directly impact
the accuracy of the morescient data curation process. Thus, the creation of morescient data sets
will not only complement the syntactic models that currently exist, it will also further improve
their quality since non-executable (non-testable) code can be identified and filtered out.
   Scalable code analysis platforms [18], such as software observatories (e.g., LASSO) that realize
the aforementioned data structures are essential for enabling the mass-execution of code modules
at ultra-large scales, thereby generating the vast quantities of run-time data needed to grow the
open SRH. Furthermore, automated build systems such as continuous integration platforms can
provide a supplementary source of run-time data by continuously building and running code.
Despite its potential value, the role and quality of collected build data remain understudied [7]
and warrant further research to fully realize their exploitation. SRHs can be generated from the
build and run-time data collected by these platforms, thereby enhancing the value of what would
otherwise be discarded build data. By repurposing this data, SRHs offer a means to preserve the
knowledge gained.

5.2 Training
Once a foundational, evolving SRH has been established, the first and most crucial step is to include
it in LLMs’ training data, either during the initial pre-training stage when new LLMs are created
or in subsequent transfer learning steps, where existing models are further trained on SRHs to
“fine-tune” their behavioral awareness. In both scenarios, the observational data encapsulated within

                          ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: November 2024.
1:12                                                                                 Marcus Kessel and Colin Atkinson


SRHs can be made available for training in either a direct or indirect form. In direct approaches,
LLMs are presented with “raw” (cleaned) SRH data containing uncensored descriptions of numerous
executions of a wide array of code modules.
   While this is likely to give the best results, the scale of the data sets involved presents numerous
practical problems to researchers, including the need for significant processing power. In indirect
approaches, the SRH data is (pre)processed in some way as preparation for training. For example,
reusable vector representations (e.g., embeddings such as Word2vec [48] and BERT [14]), can
be generated from the data in which information with “close” vector values is assumed to be
more closely related than that with more distant values. Another indirect approach is to construct
knowledge graphs from SRHs in order to encode relationships efficiently and to train models to
predict missing links [54].
   State-of-the-art architectures used to train LLMs have achieved impressive performance on
natural language texts, including code, leveraging their syntactic capabilities. However, incorporat-
ing observational data alongside syntactic data as training inputs may necessitate architectural
modifications. The choice of representation for observational data has a significant impact on the
construction of more sophisticated models that integrate both facets. Observational data can be
treated either as textual content or as an additional modality, similar to image information. Given
our assumption that both syntactic and observational data will co-evolve, combining models in the
spirit of multi-modal architectures may yield benefits. With the availability of diverse run-time data,
it may be advantageous to specify multiple representations of observational data, encompassing
various levels of abstraction and semantic precision (Section 2). Given the preliminary findings
on observational data presented in Section 2, we anticipate that further research will focus on
developing suitable architectures and representations for training morescient code models.

5.3    Augmented Generation
The second way is to use an evolving SRH, along with a test driver like LASSO’s arena, as an external
knowledge source to provide a variety of services that existing, syntactically-trained code models
can call to improve their accuracy and relevance. These generation augmentation services [47] can
range from simple testing services, where the LLM can ask whether a generated piece of code has
the expected functionality, to oracle services, where the LLM can ask for oracle values for the desired
functionality (see [31] for further details). The external knowledge source therefore essentially
provides an external fact-checking mechanism that can identify “incorrect” code generations.
Recently, researchers have been exploring fact-checking models [57] that specialize in verifying the
output of LLMs, helping to detect false claims and hallucinations. These models leverage factual
information to verify whether an LLM’s output is factually accurate. Morescient versions of these
models can take advantage of knowledge sources like SRHs to validate a claim by comparing it
against established facts (here observational data).

5.4    Prompting
Prompting LLMs involves designing the input prompts to elicit the most accurate, relevant and
helpful responses from a model. The design of the prompts used to invoke LLM models, therefore,
plays a huge role in their perceived performance [36, 59]. The aforementioned stimulus-response
data structures in Section 3 can help improve prompting in three main ways. First, the minimalistic
and structured test representation approach offered by sequence sheets can reduce user errors
and misunderstandings when they serve as prompt templates. Secondly, since tests are frequently
included in prompts to code LLMs to improve precision, users can enrich their prompts to non-
morescient models using information from SRHs. Thirdly, the service APIs (e.g., functions) of the

ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: November 2024.
Morescient GAI for Software Engineering (Extended Version)                                                        1:13


platforms that support morescient GAI can themselves be included in prompts to encourage LLMs
to obtain external factual information [47].

5.5    Test-driven Software Experimentation
Finally, the adoption and development of any new technology, including morescient GAI, is critically
dependent on experimental evidence of its strengths and weaknesses. Stimulus-response data
structures coupled with a scalable test driver of the kind offered by LASSO, are a key foundation
for evaluating and comparing code LLMs in a generalizable way. Only by performing large scale
test-driven experiments can subtle differences in the generation of alternative code solutions or
tests be detected and “n-version” comparisons of the different implementations be performed (e.g.,
strengthened through differential testing [59], or differential GAI in general [31]), for example to
fine-tune LLM “hyperparameters”.
   Moreover, making detailed information about the continual SRH openly accessible in accor-
dance with the principles of open science [46] facilitates the development of new and improved
evaluation metrics, such as pass@k [22], or BLEU scores, which rely on a canonical, ground truth
implementation [19].

5.6    AI-driven Software and Decision-Making
Orthogonal to the milestones previously described, the integration of generative AI into software
products is on the rise, blurring the lines between algorithmic and probabilistic reasoning. Compo-
nents of a software system can now comprise imperative code and probabilistic models, making it
increasingly difficult to distinguish between them. This shift contrasts with retrieval augmented
generation, where a model is enhanced by external tools.
   AI-driven software tools, such as smart IDEs (e.g., VSCode and GitHub Copilot), can leverage
the standardized data structures (i.e., sequence sheets and SRHs) to achieve interoperability between
LLM representations and run-time information obtained in IDEs. This will enable seamless use of
algorithmic or LLM-based components for software engineering tasks and decision-making. These
tools will likely employ multiple models and meta-modeling, making standard data structures and
semantic representations even more essential to ensure interoperability between them.
   For now, the developer remains actively engaged in the development process. Data structures,
particularly sequence sheets, not only serve as a means to understand and communicate behavior
but also facilitate collaboration among stakeholders – like code. However, with advancements in
AI-driven software engineering, it is likely that some of the tasks will soon be fully automated.
There is growing interest in LLM-based agents like SWE-agent [62] and AutoDev [58], which
utilize a combination of models and tools to accomplish specific tasks within a given cost budget,
thereby achieving complete autonomy. As LLM-based agents evolve, the integration of sophisticated
data structures like SRHs out-of-the-box will become even more important, further accelerating
the automation of software engineering tasks.
   In an ideal future, where morescient GAI has reached its full potential, it may become possible
for highly advanced morescient models to accurately predict the execution of software, making
traditional verification and validation processes largely obsolete or redundant. With developers and
autonomous agents increasingly reliant on data-driven decision-making, an open, evolving SRH
would provide a robust foundation for informed decision-making over time (e.g., reduce debugging
activities or log analysis).

6     CONCLUSION
The hypothesis of this paper is that the trustworthiness, and thus the utility, of GAI for software
engineering tasks will be significantly boosted by creating morescient code models trained on the

                          ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: November 2024.
1:14                                                                                     Marcus Kessel and Colin Atkinson


semantic (i.e., dynamic) as well as the syntactic (i.e., static) aspects of software. Among other things,
making LLMs morescient will allow them to make much better judgments about the run-time
behavior of the software they synthesize in response to prompts. However, creating, organizing
and representing the vast quantities of observation data needed to realize this vision will require
new kinds of data structures and software observation platforms that can populate them while
respecting important data set properties, such as avoiding duplication [1].
   We have introduced the new data structures and the platform we envisage and have discussed
the different ways in which they can help foster morescient GAI in an open, community-driven way.
In a seminal “road map” for source code analysis published in 2007 [8], Brinkley predicted that by
2025 software analysis tools will “appear to understand algorithms and can automatically suggest
superior solutions to specific problems”. By applying the ideas, technologies and roadmap presented
in this paper, we believe Brinkley’s vision is well on track to realization, and fully morescient GAI
will soon facilitate the practical use of GAI in mainstream software projects.

REFERENCES
 [1] Miltiadis Allamanis. 2019. The adverse effects of code duplication in machine learning models of code. In Proceedings
     of the 2019 ACM SIGPLAN International Symposium on New Ideas, New Paradigms, and Reflections on Programming
     and Software (Athens, Greece) (Onward! 2019). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 143–153.
     https://doi.org/10.1145/3359591.3359735
 [2] Miltiadis Allamanis, Earl T. Barr, Premkumar Devanbu, and Charles Sutton. 2018. A Survey of Machine Learning for
     Big Code and Naturalness. ACM Comput. Surv. 51, 4, Article 81 (jul 2018), 37 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3212695
 [3] Paul Ammann and Jeff Offutt. 2016. Introduction to software testing. Cambridge University Press.
 [4] Owura Asare, Meiyappan Nagappan, and N. Asokan. 2023. Is GitHub’s Copilot as bad as humans at introducing
     vulnerabilities in code? Empirical Software Engineering 28, 6 (Sept. 2023), 129. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10664-023-
     10380-1
 [5] Earl T. Barr, Mark Harman, Phil McMinn, Muzammil Shahbaz, and Shin Yoo. 2015. The Oracle Problem in Software
     Testing: A Survey. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering 41, 5 (2015), 507–525. https://doi.org/10.1109/TSE.2014.
     2372785
 [6] Victor R Basili. 1994. Goal question metric paradigm. Encyclopedia of software engineering (1994), 528–532.
 [7] Moritz Beller, Georgios Gousios, and Andy Zaidman. 2017. TravisTorrent: Synthesizing Travis CI and GitHub for
     Full-Stack Research on Continuous Integration. In 2017 IEEE/ACM 14th International Conference on Mining Software
     Repositories (MSR). 447–450. https://doi.org/10.1109/MSR.2017.24
 [8] David Binkley. 2007. Source Code Analysis: A Road Map. In Future of Software Engineering (FOSE ’07). 104–119.
     https://doi.org/10.1109/FOSE.2007.27
 [9] Islem Bouzenia, Bajaj Piyush Krishan, and Michael Pradel. 2024. DyPyBench: A Benchmark of Executable Python
     Software. Proc. ACM Softw. Eng. 1, FSE, Article 16 (jul 2024), 21 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3643742
[10] F. Cassano, J. Gouwar, D. Nguyen, S. Nguyen, L. Phipps-Costin, D. Pinckney, M. Yee, Y. Zi, C. Anderson, M. Q. Feldman,
     A. Guha, M. Greenberg, and A. Jangda. 2023. MultiPL-E: A Scalable and Polyglot Approach to Benchmarking Neural
     Code Generation. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering 49, 07 (jul 2023), 3675–3691. https://doi.org/10.1109/TSE.
     2023.3267446
[11] Bei Chen, Fengji Zhang, Anh Nguyen, Daoguang Zan, Zeqi Lin, Jian-Guang Lou, and Weizhu Chen. 2022. CodeT: Code
     Generation with Generated Tests. arXiv:2207.10397 [cs.CL] https://arxiv.org/abs/2207.10397
[12] Xinyun Chen, Maxwell Lin, Nathanael Schärli, and Denny Zhou. 2023. Teaching Large Language Models to Self-Debug.
     arXiv:2304.05128 [cs.CL] https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.05128
[13] Bas Cornelissen, Andy Zaidman, Arie van Deursen, Leon Moonen, and Rainer Koschke. 2009. A Systematic Survey of
     Program Comprehension through Dynamic Analysis. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering 35, 5 (2009), 684–702.
     https://doi.org/10.1109/TSE.2009.28
[14] Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. 2019. BERT: Pre-training of Deep Bidirectional
     Transformers for Language Understanding. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter
     of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers),
     Jill Burstein, Christy Doran, and Thamar Solorio (Eds.). Association for Computational Linguistics, Minneapolis,
     Minnesota, 4171–4186. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/N19-1423
[15] Elizabeth Dinella, Gabriel Ryan, Todd Mytkowicz, and Shuvendu K. Lahiri. 2022. TOGA: a neural method for test oracle
     generation. In Proceedings of the 44th International Conference on Software Engineering (Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania) (ICSE


ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: November 2024.
Morescient GAI for Software Engineering (Extended Version)                                                              1:15


     ’22). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2130–2141. https://doi.org/10.1145/3510003.3510141
[16] Yangruibo Ding, Jinjun Peng, Marcus J. Min, Gail Kaiser, Junfeng Yang, and Baishakhi Ray. 2024. SemCoder: Training
     Code Language Models with Comprehensive Semantics. arXiv:2406.01006 [cs.CL] https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.01006
[17] Yangruibo Ding, Benjamin Steenhoek, Kexin Pei, Gail Kaiser, Wei Le, and Baishakhi Ray. 2024. TRACED: Execution-
     aware Pre-training for Source Code. In Proceedings of the 46th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Software Engineering
     (Lisbon, Portugal) (ICSE ’24). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 36, 12 pages. https:
     //doi.org/10.1145/3597503.3608140
[18] Robert Dyer, Hoan Anh Nguyen, Hridesh Rajan, and Tien N. Nguyen. 2013. Boa: A language and infrastructure for
     analyzing ultra-large-scale software repositories. In 2013 35th International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE).
     422–431. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICSE.2013.6606588
[19] Aryaz Eghbali and Michael Pradel. 2023. CrystalBLEU: Precisely and Efficiently Measuring the Similarity of Code. In
     Proceedings of the 37th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software Engineering (ASE ’22). Association
     for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 28, 12 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3551349.3556903
[20] Michael D Ernst. 2003. Static and dynamic analysis: Synergy and duality. In WODA 2003: ICSE Workshop on Dynamic
     Analysis. New Mexico State University Portland, OR, 24–27.
[21] Lichao Sun et al. 2024. TrustLLM: Trustworthiness in Large Language Models. arXiv:2401.05561 [cs.CL]
[22] Mark Chen et al. 2021. Evaluating Large Language Models Trained on Code. arXiv:2107.03374 [cs.LG]
[23] GitHub Blog. 2024. Research: Quantifying GitHub Copilot’s impact in the enterprise with Accenture. https://github.blog/
     news-insights/research/research-quantifying-github-copilots-impact-in-the-enterprise-with-accenture/
[24] Alex Gu, Baptiste Rozière, Hugh Leather, Armando Solar-Lezama, Gabriel Synnaeve, and Sida I. Wang. 2024. CRUXEval:
     A Benchmark for Code Reasoning, Understanding and Execution. arXiv:2401.03065 [cs.SE] https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.
     03065
[25] Carl A Gunter. 1992. Semantics of programming languages: structures and techniques. MIT press.
[26] Robert M. Hierons, Kirill Bogdanov, Jonathan P. Bowen, Rance Cleaveland, John Derrick, Jeremy Dick, Marian
     Gheorghe, Mark Harman, Kalpesh Kapoor, Paul Krause, Gerald Lüttgen, Anthony J. H. Simons, Sergiy Vilkomir,
     Martin R. Woodward, and Hussein Zedan. 2009. Using Formal Specifications to Support Testing. ACM Comput. Surv.
     41, 2, Article 9 (Feb. 2009), 76 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/1459352.1459354
[27] Xinyi Hou, Yanjie Zhao, Yue Liu, Zhou Yang, Kailong Wang, Li Li, Xiapu Luo, David Lo, John Grundy, and Haoyu Wang.
     2024. Large Language Models for Software Engineering: A Systematic Literature Review. arXiv:2308.10620 [cs.SE]
[28] Kevin Jesse, Toufique Ahmed, Premkumar T. Devanbu, and Emily Morgan. 2023. Large Language Models and
     Simple, Stupid Bugs. In 2023 IEEE/ACM 20th International Conference on Mining Software Repositories (MSR). 563–575.
     https://doi.org/10.1109/MSR59073.2023.00082
[29] Jared Kaplan, Sam McCandlish, Tom Henighan, Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Chess, Rewon Child, Scott Gray, Alec
     Radford, Jeffrey Wu, and Dario Amodei. 2020. Scaling Laws for Neural Language Models. arXiv:2001.08361 [cs.LG]
     https://arxiv.org/abs/2001.08361
[30] Marcus Kessel and Colin Atkinson. 2019. Automatically Curated Data Sets. In 2019 19th International Working Conference
     on Source Code Analysis and Manipulation (SCAM). 56–61. https://doi.org/10.1109/SCAM.2019.00015
[31] Marcus Kessel and Colin Atkinson. 2024. N-Version Assessment and Enhancement of Generative AI. IEEE Software
     (2024), 1–8. https://doi.org/10.1109/MS.2024.3469388 arXiv:2409.14071
[32] Marcus Kessel and Colin Atkinson. 2024. Promoting open science in test-driven software experiments. Journal
     of Systems and Software Special Issue - Open Science in Software Engineering Research 212 (2024), 111971. https:
     //doi.org/10.1016/j.jss.2024.111971
[33] Katherine Lee, Daphne Ippolito, Andrew Nystrom, Chiyuan Zhang, Douglas Eck, Chris Callison-Burch, and Nicholas
     Carlini. 2022. Deduplicating Training Data Makes Language Models Better. In Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting
     of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), Smaranda Muresan, Preslav Nakov, and Aline
     Villavicencio (Eds.). Association for Computational Linguistics, Dublin, Ireland, 8424–8445. https://doi.org/10.18653/
     v1/2022.acl-long.577
[34] Bo Li, Peng Qi, Bo Liu, Shuai Di, Jingen Liu, Jiquan Pei, Jinfeng Yi, and Bowen Zhou. 2023. Trustworthy AI: From
     Principles to Practices. ACM Comput. Surv. 55, 9, Article 177 (jan 2023), 46 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3555803
[35] Chengshu Li, Jacky Liang, Andy Zeng, Xinyun Chen, Karol Hausman, Dorsa Sadigh, Sergey Levine, Li Fei-Fei,
     Fei Xia, and Brian Ichter. 2024. Chain of Code: Reasoning with a Language Model-Augmented Code Emulator.
     arXiv:2312.04474 [cs.CL] https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.04474
[36] Xuan Li, Shuai Yuan, Xiaodong Gu, Yuting Chen, and Beijun Shen. 2024. Few-shot code translation via task-adapted
     prompt learning. Journal of Systems and Software 212 (2024), 112002. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jss.2024.112002
[37] Yujia Li, David Choi, Junyoung Chung, Nate Kushman, Julian Schrittwieser, Rémi Leblond, Tom Eccles, James Keeling,
     Felix Gimeno, Agustin Dal Lago, Thomas Hubert, Peter Choy, Cyprien de Masson d’Autume, Igor Babuschkin,
     Xinyun Chen, Po-Sen Huang, Johannes Welbl, Sven Gowal, Alexey Cherepanov, James Molloy, Daniel J. Mankowitz,


                             ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: November 2024.
1:16                                                                                     Marcus Kessel and Colin Atkinson


     Esme Sutherland Robson, Pushmeet Kohli, Nando de Freitas, Koray Kavukcuoglu, and Oriol Vinyals. 2022. Competition-
     level code generation with AlphaCode. Science 378, 6624 (2022), 1092–1097. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.abq1158
     arXiv:https://www.science.org/doi/pdf/10.1126/science.abq1158
[38] Chenxiao Liu, Shuai Lu, Weizhu Chen, Daxin Jiang, Alexey Svyatkovskiy, Shengyu Fu, Neel Sundaresan, and Nan
     Duan. 2023. Code Execution with Pre-trained Language Models. In Findings of the Association for Computational
     Linguistics: ACL 2023, Anna Rogers, Jordan Boyd-Graber, and Naoaki Okazaki (Eds.). Association for Computational
     Linguistics, Toronto, Canada, 4984–4999. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-acl.308
[39] Jiawei Liu, Chunqiu Steven Xia, Yuyao Wang, and LINGMING ZHANG. 2023. Is Your Code Generated by ChatGPT
     Really Correct? Rigorous Evaluation of Large Language Models for Code Generation. In Thirty-seventh Conference on
     Neural Information Processing Systems. https://openreview.net/forum?id=1qvx610Cu7
[40] Jiate Liu, Yiqin Zhu, Kaiwen Xiao, QIANG FU, Xiao Han, Yang Wei, and Deheng Ye. 2023. RLTF: Reinforcement
     Learning from Unit Test Feedback. Transactions on Machine Learning Research (2023). https://openreview.net/forum?
     id=hjYmsV6nXZ
[41] Yue Liu, Thanh Le-Cong, Ratnadira Widyasari, Chakkrit Tantithamthavorn, Li Li, Xuan-Bach D. Le, and David Lo.
     2024. Refining ChatGPT-Generated Code: Characterizing and Mitigating Code Quality Issues. ACM Trans. Softw. Eng.
     Methodol. 33, 5, Article 116 (jun 2024), 26 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3643674
[42] Liu, Jiawei and Xia, Chunqiu Steven and Wang, Yuyao and Zhang, Lingming. 2024. EvalPlus Leaderboard. https:
     //evalplus.github.io/leaderboard.html
[43] David Lo. 2023. Trustworthy and Synergistic Artificial Intelligence for Software Engineering: Vision and Roadmaps. In
     2023 IEEE/ACM International Conference on Software Engineering: Future of Software Engineering (ICSE-FoSE). 69–85.
     https://doi.org/10.1109/ICSE-FoSE59343.2023.00010
[44] Anton Lozhkov, Raymond Li, Loubna Ben Allal, Federico Cassano, Joel Lamy-Poirier, Nouamane Tazi, Ao Tang, Dmytro
     Pykhtar, Jiawei Liu, Yuxiang Wei, Tianyang Liu, Max Tian, Denis Kocetkov, Arthur Zucker, Younes Belkada, Zijian
     Wang, Qian Liu, Dmitry Abulkhanov, Indraneil Paul, Zhuang Li, Wen-Ding Li, Megan Risdal, Jia Li, Jian Zhu, Terry Yue
     Zhuo, Evgenii Zheltonozhskii, Nii Osae Osae Dade, Wenhao Yu, Lucas Krauß, Naman Jain, Yixuan Su, Xuanli He,
     Manan Dey, Edoardo Abati, Yekun Chai, Niklas Muennighoff, Xiangru Tang, Muhtasham Oblokulov, Christopher Akiki,
     Marc Marone, Chenghao Mou, Mayank Mishra, Alex Gu, Binyuan Hui, Tri Dao, Armel Zebaze, Olivier Dehaene, Nicolas
     Patry, Canwen Xu, Julian McAuley, Han Hu, Torsten Scholak, Sebastien Paquet, Jennifer Robinson, Carolyn Jane
     Anderson, Nicolas Chapados, Mostofa Patwary, Nima Tajbakhsh, Yacine Jernite, Carlos Muñoz Ferrandis, Lingming
     Zhang, Sean Hughes, Thomas Wolf, Arjun Guha, Leandro von Werra, and Harm de Vries. 2024. StarCoder 2 and The
     Stack v2: The Next Generation. arXiv:2402.19173 [cs.SE] https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.19173
[45] Alexandre Matton, Tom Sherborne, Dennis Aumiller, Elena Tommasone, Milad Alizadeh, Jingyi He, Raymond Ma,
     Maxime Voisin, Ellen Gilsenan-McMahon, and Matthias Gallé. 2024. On Leakage of Code Generation Evaluation
     Datasets. arXiv:2407.07565 [cs.CL] https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.07565
[46] Daniel Méndez Fernández, Martin Monperrus, Robert Feldt, and Thomas Zimmermann. 2019. The open science
     initiative of the Empirical Software Engineering journal. Empirical Software Engineering 24, 3 (01 Jun 2019), 1057–1060.
     https://doi.org/10.1007/s10664-019-09712-x
[47] Grégoire Mialon, Roberto Dessi, Maria Lomeli, Christoforos Nalmpantis, Ramakanth Pasunuru, Roberta Raileanu,
     Baptiste Roziere, Timo Schick, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Asli Celikyilmaz, Edouard Grave, Yann LeCun, and Thomas Scialom.
     2023. Augmented Language Models: a Survey. Transactions on Machine Learning Research (2023). https://openreview.
     net/forum?id=jh7wH2AzKK Survey Certification.
[48] Tomas Mikolov, Kai Chen, Greg Corrado, and Jeffrey Dean. 2013. Efficient Estimation of Word Representations in
     Vector Space. arXiv:1301.3781 [cs.CL]
[49] Ansong Ni, Miltiadis Allamanis, Arman Cohan, Yinlin Deng, Kensen Shi, Charles Sutton, and Pengcheng Yin. 2024.
     NExT: Teaching Large Language Models to Reason about Code Execution. arXiv:2404.14662 [cs.LG] https://arxiv.org/
     abs/2404.14662
[50] Ansong Ni, Srini Iyer, Dragomir Radev, Ves Stoyanov, Wen-tau Yih, Sida I Wang, and Xi Victoria Lin. 2023. Lever:
     Learning to verify language-to-code generation with execution. In Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on
     Machine Learning (ICML’23).
[51] Maxwell Nye, Anders Johan Andreassen, Guy Gur-Ari, Henryk Michalewski, Jacob Austin, David Bieber, David
     Dohan, Aitor Lewkowycz, Maarten Bosma, David Luan, Charles Sutton, and Augustus Odena. 2021. Show Your Work:
     Scratchpads for Intermediate Computation with Language Models. arXiv:2112.00114 [cs.LG] https://arxiv.org/abs/
     2112.00114
[52] Jens Palsberg and Cristina V. Lopes. 2018. NJR: a normalized Java resource. In Companion Proceedings for the
     ISSTA/ECOOP 2018 Workshops (Amsterdam, Netherlands) (ISSTA ’18). Association for Computing Machinery, New
     York, NY, USA, 100–106. https://doi.org/10.1145/3236454.3236501



ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: November 2024.
Morescient GAI for Software Engineering (Extended Version)                                                         1:17


[53] H. G. Rice. 1953. Classes of Recursively Enumerable Sets and Their Decision Problems. Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 74, 2
     (1953), 358–366. http://www.jstor.org/stable/1990888
[54] Andrea Rossi, Denilson Barbosa, Donatella Firmani, Antonio Matinata, and Paolo Merialdo. 2021. Knowledge Graph
     Embedding for Link Prediction: A Comparative Analysis. ACM Trans. Knowl. Discov. Data 15, 2, Article 14 (jan 2021),
     49 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3424672
[55] Parshin Shojaee, Aneesh Jain, Sindhu Tipirneni, and Chandan K. Reddy. 2023. Execution-based Code Generation using
     Deep Reinforcement Learning. Transactions on Machine Learning Research (2023). https://openreview.net/forum?id=
     0XBuaxqEcG
[56] Ilia Shumailov, Zakhar Shumaylov, Yiren Zhao, Nicolas Papernot, Ross Anderson, and Yarin Gal. 2024. AI models
     collapse when trained on recursively generated data. Nature 631, 8022 (2024), 755–759.
[57] Liyan Tang, Philippe Laban, and Greg Durrett. 2024. MiniCheck: Efficient Fact-Checking of LLMs on Grounding
     Documents. arXiv:2404.10774 [cs.CL] https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.10774
[58] Michele Tufano, Anisha Agarwal, Jinu Jang, Roshanak Zilouchian Moghaddam, and Neel Sundaresan. 2024. AutoDev:
     Automated AI-Driven Development. arXiv:2403.08299 [cs.SE] https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.08299
[59] Junjie Wang, Yuchao Huang, Chunyang Chen, Zhe Liu, Song Wang, and Qing Wang. 2024. Software Testing With Large
     Language Models: Survey, Landscape, and Vision. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering 50, 4 (2024), 911–936.
     https://doi.org/10.1109/TSE.2024.3368208
[60] Yuxiang Wei, Zhe Wang, Jiawei Liu, Yifeng Ding, and Lingming Zhang. 2024. Magicoder: Empowering Code Generation
     with OSS-Instruct. arXiv:2312.02120 [cs.CL] https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.02120
[61] Chunqiu Steven Xia, Yuxiang Wei, and Lingming Zhang. 2023. Automated Program Repair in the Era of Large Pre-
     trained Language Models. In 2023 IEEE/ACM 45th International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE). 1482–1494.
     https://doi.org/10.1109/ICSE48619.2023.00129
[62] John Yang, Carlos E. Jimenez, Alexander Wettig, Kilian Lieret, Shunyu Yao, Karthik Narasimhan, and Ofir Press.
     2024. SWE-agent: Agent-Computer Interfaces Enable Automated Software Engineering. arXiv:2405.15793 [cs.SE]
     https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.15793




                           ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: November 2024.
